---
published: true
title: Another Machine Learning Walkthrough and a Challenge
categories:
  - machine learning
  - python
  - project
---
## Don’t just read about machine learning — practice it!

After spending considerable time and money on courses, books, and videos, I’ve
arrived at one conclusion: the most effective way to learn data science is by
doing data science projects. Reading, listening, and taking notes is valuable,
but it’s not until you work through a problem that concepts solidify from
abstractions into tools you feel confident using.

In this article, I’ll present another machine learning walk-through in Python
and also leave you with a challenge: try to develop a better solution (some
helpful tips are included)! The complete [Jupyter Notebook for this project can
be run on
Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/willkoehrsen/a-walkthrough-and-a-challenge) — no
download required — or [accessed on
GitHub](https://github.com/WillKoehrsen/taxi-fare/blob/master/A Walkthrough and
a Challenge.ipynb).

<!--more-->

*****

### Problem Statement

The [New York City Taxi Fare prediction
challenge](https://www.kaggle.com/c/new-york-city-taxi-fare-prediction),
currently running on Kaggle, is a *supervised regression* machine learning task.
Given pickup and dropoff locations, the pickup timestamp, and the passenger
count, the objective is to predict the fare of the taxi ride. Like most [Kaggle
competitions](https://www.kaggle.com/c/), this problem isn’t 100% reflective of
those in industry, but it does present a realistic dataset and task on which we
can hone our machine learning skills.

To solve this problem, we’ll follow a standard data science pipeline plan of
attack:

1.  **Understand the problem and data**
1.  **Data exploration / data cleaning**
1.  **Feature engineering / feature selection**
1.  **Model evaluation and selection**
1.  **Model optimization**
1.  **Interpretation of results and predictions**

This outline may seem to present a linear path from start to finish, but data
science is a highly non-linear process where steps are repeated or completed out
of order. As we gain familiarity with the data, we often want to go back and
revisit our past decisions or take a new approach.

> While the final Jupyter Notebook may present a cohesive story, the development
> process is very messy, involving rewriting code and changing earlier decisions.

Throughout the article, I’ll point out a number of areas in which I think an
enterprising data scientist — you — could improve on my solution. I have labeled
these *potential improvements* because as a largely empirical field, there are
no guarantees in machine learning.

*****

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*KjeHm6hEG9u2rtLNBDhiUQ.png)
*New York City Taxi Fare Prediction Challenge ([Link](https://www.kaggle.com/c/new-york-city-taxi-fare-prediction))*

#### Getting Started

The [Taxi Fare
dataset](https://www.kaggle.com/c/new-york-city-taxi-fare-prediction/data) is
relatively large at 55 million training rows, but simple to understand, with
only 6 features. The `fare_amount` is the target, the continuous value we’ll
train a model to predict:

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*fedIO_9JF6nkOamV54Hswg.png)
*Training Data*

Throughout the notebook, I used only a sample of 5,000,000 rows to make the
calculations quicker. My first recommendation thus is:

* **Potential improvement 1: use more data for training the model**

It’s not assured that larger quantities of data will help, but [empirical
studies have found that
generally](https://research.google.com/pubs/archive/35179.pdf), as the amount of
data used for training a model increases, performance increases. A model trained
on more data can better learn the actual signals, especially in a
high-dimensional problem with a large number of features (this is not a
high-dimensional dataset so there could be limited returns to using more data).

While the sheer size of the dataset may be intimidating, frameworks such as
[Dask](https://dask.pydata.org/) allow you to handle even massive datasets on a
personal laptop. Moreover, learning how to set-up and use cloud computing, such
as Amazon ECS, is a vital skill once the data exceeds the capability of your
machine.

Fortunately, it doesn’t take much research to understand this data: most of us
have taken taxi rides before and we know that taxis charge based on miles
driven. Therefore for feature engineering, we’ll want to find a way to represent
the distance traveled based on the information we are given. We can also read
[notebooks from other data
scientists](https://www.kaggle.com/c/new-york-city-taxi-fare-prediction/kernels)
or read through the [competition
discussion](https://www.kaggle.com/c/new-york-city-taxi-fare-prediction/discussion)
for ideas about how to solve the problem.

*****

#### Data Exploration and Cleaning

Although Kaggle data is usually cleaner than real-world data, this dataset still
has a few problems, namely anomalies in several of the features. I like to carry
out data cleaning as part of the exploration process, correcting anomalies or
data errors as I find them. For this problem, we can spot outliers by looking at
statistics of the data using `df.describe()`.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*fo3nZmXRHQRCOVeQlGAygA.png)
*Statistical description of training data*

The anomalies in `passenger_count`, the coordinates, and the `fare_amount` were
addressed through a combination of domain knowledge and looking at the
distribution of the data. For example, reading about [taxi fares in
NYC](http://home.nyc.gov/html/tlc/html/passenger/taxicab_rate.shtml), we see
that the minimum fare amount is $2.50 which means we should exclude some of the
rides based on the fare. For the coordinates, we can look at the distribution
and exclude values that fall well outside the norm. Once we’ve identified
outliers, we can remove them using code like the following:


```python
data = data.loc[data['pickup_latitude'].between(40, 42)]
data = data.loc[data['pickup_longitude'].between(-75, -72)]
data = data.loc[data['dropoff_latitude'].between(40, 42)]
data = data.loc[data['dropoff_longitude'].between(-75, -72)]
```

Once we clean the data, we can get to the fun part: visualization. Below is a
plot of the pickup and dropoff locations on top of NYC colored by the binned
fare (binning is a way of turning a continuous variable into a discrete one).

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/600/1*pAwxGw7veApg8GN60SoTbQ.png)
![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/600/1*Vy8jl9Q83pmupOj2DIHAtw.png)
*Pickups and Dropoffs plotted on New York City*

We also want to take a look at the target variable. Following is an [Empirical
Cumulative Distribution Function
(ECDF)](http://bjlkeng.github.io/posts/the-empirical-distribution-function/)
plot of the Target variable, the fare amount. The ECDF can be a [better
visualization choice than a
histogram](https://www.andata.at/en/software-blog-reader/why-we-love-the-cdf-and-do-not-like-histograms-that-much.html)
for one variable because it doesn’t have artifacts from binning.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*uUeTHtwHkxmuLZJJvVhMUQ.png)
*ECDF of Target*

Besides being interesting to look at, plots can help us identify anomalies,
relationships, or ideas for new features. In the maps, the color represents the
fare, and we can see that the fares starting or ending at the airport (bottom
right) tend to be among the most expensive. Going back to the domain knowledge,
we read the standard fare for rides to JFK airport is $45, so if we could find a
way to identify airport rides, then we’d know the fare accurately.

While I didn’t go that far in this notebook, using domain knowledge for data
cleaning and feature engineering is extremely valuable. My second recommendation
for improvement is:

* **Potential Improvement 2: Experiment with different methods for outlier removal
and data cleaning.**

This can be done with domain knowledge (such as a map), or statistical methods
(such as z-scores). One interesting approach to this problem is in [this
notebook](https://www.kaggle.com/breemen/nyc-taxi-fare-data-exploration), where
the author removed rides that began or ended in the water.

The inclusion / exclusion of outliers can have a significant effect on model
performance. However, like most problems in machine learning, there’s no
standard approach (here’s one[ statistical
method](https://www.kdnuggets.com/2017/02/removing-outliers-standard-deviation-python.html)
in Python you could try).

*****

#### Feature Engineering

Feature engineering is the process of creating new features — predictor
variables — out of an existing dataset. Because a machine learning model can
only learn from the features it is given, this is the [most important step of
the machine learning
pipeline](https://homes.cs.washington.edu/~pedrod/papers/cacm12.pdf).

For datasets with multiple tables and relationships between the tables, we’ll
probably want to use [automated feature
engineering](https://medium.com/p/99baf11cc219?source=user_profile---------18------------------),
but because this problem has a relatively small number of columns and only one
table, we can hand-build a few high-value features.

For example, since we know that the cost of a taxi ride is proportional to the
distance, we’ll want to use the start and stop points to try and find the
distance traveled. One rough approximation of distance is the absolute value of
the difference between the start and end latitudes and longitudes.


```python
# Absolute difference in latitude and longitude
data['abs_lat_diff'] = (data['dropoff_latitude'] - data['pickup_latitude']).abs()
data['abs_lon_diff'] = (data['dropoff_longitude'] - data['pickup_longitude']).abs()
```


Features don’t have to be complex to be useful! Below is a plot of these new
features colored by the binned fare.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*imuUlGXsEgw11eU2kFb-bg.png)
*Absolute Longitude vs Absolute Latitude*

What these features give us is a *relative* measure of distance because they are
calculated in terms of latitude and longitude and not an actual metric. These
features are useful for comparison, but if we want a measurement in kilometers,
we can apply the [Haversine
formula](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haversine_formula) between the start and
end of the trip, which calculates the Great Circle distance. This is still an
approximation because it gives distance along a line drawn on the spherical
surface of the Earth (I’m told the Earth is a sphere) connecting the two points,
and clearly, taxis do not travel along straight lines. (See notebook for
details).

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*6YMdk1oov3hlBUg4vVxSQA.png)
*Haversine distance by Fare (binned)*

The other major source of features for this problem are time based. Given a date
and time, there are numerous new variables we can extract. Constructing time
features is a common task, and in the notebook I’ve included a useful function
that builds a dozen features from a single timestamp.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*5Rq8G-5WyOf3UdKOUyG7MA.png)
*Fare amount colored by time of day*

Although I built almost 20 features in this project, there are still more to be
found. The tough part about feature engineering is you never know when you have
fully exhausted all the options. My next recommendation is:

* **Potential Improvement 3: Construct more features or apply feature selection to the existing features to find an optimal set.**

Feature engineering also involves problem expertise or applying [algorithms that
automatically build features for you](https://www.featuretools.com/demos). After
building features, you’ll often have to apply [feature
selection](http://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/feature_selection.html#feature-selection)
to find the most relevant ones.

Once you have clean data and a set of features, you start testing models. Even
though feature engineering comes before modeling on the outline, I often return
to this step again and again over the course of a project.

#### Model Evaluation and Selection

A good first choice of model for establishing a baseline on a regression task is
a simple linear regression. Moreover, if we look at the Pearson correlation of
the features with the fare amount for this problem, we find several very strong
linear relationships as shown below.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*1U_CSlHP83Z4FEafgcYdQg.png)
*Pearson Correlations of Features with Target*

Based on the strength of the linear relationships between some of the features
and the target, we can expect a linear model to do reasonably well. While
ensemble models and deep neural networks get all the attention, there’s no
reason to use an overly complex model if a simple, interpretable model can
achieve nearly the same performance. Nonetheless, it still makes sense to try
different models, especially because they are easy to build with Scikit-Learn.

The starting model, a linear regression trained on only three features (the
`abs` location differences and the `passenger_count`) achieved a validation root
mean squared error (RMSE) of $5.32 and a mean absolute percentage error of
28.6%. The benefit to a simple linear regression is that we can inspect the
coefficients and find for example that an increase in one passenger raises the
fare by $0.02 according to the model.

    # Linear Regression learned parameters

    Intercept 5.0819
    abs_lat_diff coef:  113.6661
    abs_lon_diff coef: 163.8758
    passenger_count coef: 0.0204

For Kaggle competitions, we can evaluate a model using both a validation set —
here I used 1,000,000 examples — and by submitting test predictions to the
competition. This allows us to compare our model to other data scientists — the
linear regression places about 600/800. Ideally, we want to use the test set
only once to get an estimate of how well our model will do on new data and
perform any optimization using a validation set (or cross validation). The
problem with Kaggle is that the leaderboard can encourage competitors to build
complex models over-optimized to the testing data.

We also want to compare our model to a naive baseline that uses no machine
learning, which in the case of regression can be guessing the mean value of the
target on the training set. This results in an RMSE of $9.35 which gives us
confidence machine learning is applicable to the problem.

Even training the linear regression on additional features does not result in a
great leaderboard score and the next step is to try a more complex model. My
next choice is usually the random forest, which is where I turned in this
problem. The random forest is a more flexible model than the linear regression
which means it has a reduced bias — it can fit the training data better. The
random forest also generally has low variance meaning it can generalize to new
data. For this problem, the random forest outperforms the linear regression,
achieving a $4.20 validation RMSE on the same feature set.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/600/1*7bQo9bwncr6L5C22lsM4gQ.png)
![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/600/1*IWzZXdrvSzO8sBImSTC62A.png)
*Test Set Prediction Distributions*

The reason a [random
forest](https://www.stat.berkeley.edu/~breiman/RandomForests/cc_home.htm)
typically outperforms a linear regression is because it has more flexibility —
lower bias — and it has reduced variance because it combines together the
predictions of many decision trees. A linear regression is a simple method and
as such has a high bias — it assumes the data is linear. A linear regression can
also be highly [influenced by
outliers](https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/350775/influential-observations-and-outliers-in-linear-regression-model)
because it solves for the fit with the lowest sum of squared errors.

The choice of model (and hyperparameters) represents the [bias-variance
tradeoff](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biasâvariance_tradeoff) in machine
learning: a model with high bias cannot learn even the training data accurately
while a model with high variance essentially memorizes the training data and
cannot generalize to new examples. Because the goal of machine learning is to
generalize to new data, we want a model with both low bias and low variance.

The best model on one problem won’t necessarily be the best model on all
problems, so it’s important to investigate several models spanning the range of
complexity. Every model should be evaluated using the *validation data* and the
best performing model can then be optimized in model tuning. I selected the
random forest because of the validation results, and I’d encourage you to try
out a few other models (or even [combine models in an
ensemble](http://blog.kaggle.com/2016/12/27/a-kagglers-guide-to-model-stacking-in-practice/)).

*****

#### Model Optimization

In a machine learning problem, we have a few approaches for improving
performance:

1.  **Get more data**
1.  **Construct more features / perform feature selection**
1.  **Optimize selected model**
1.  **Try a more complex model**

There are still gains to be made from 1. and 2. (that’s part of the challenge),
but I also wanted to provide a framework for optimizing the selected model.

Model optimization is the process of finding the best hyperparameters for a
model on a given dataset. Because the best values of the hyperparameters depend
on the data, this has to be done again for each new problem.

> I like to think of model optimization — also called model tuning — as finding
> the ideal settings of a machine learning model.

There are a number of methods for optimization, ranging from manual tuning to
[automated hyperparameter
tuning](https://medium.com/p/dfda59b72f8a?source=user_profile---------13------------------),
but [in practice, random search works
well](http://www.jmlr.org/papers/volume13/bergstra12a/bergstra12a.pdf) and is
simple to implement. In the notebook, I provide code for running random search
for model optimization. To make the computation times reasonable, I again
sampled the data and only ran 50 iterations. Even this takes a considerable
amount of time because the hyperparameters are evaluated using 3-fold cross
validation. This means on each iteration, the model is trained with a selected
combination of hyperparameters 3 times!

    The best parameters were

    {'n_estimators': 41, 'min_samples_split': 2,
    'max_leaf_nodes': 49, 'max_features': 0.5,
    'max_depth': 22, 'bootstrap': True}

    with a negative mae of -2.0216

I also tried out a number of different features and found the best model used
only 12 of the 27 features. This makes sense because many of the features are
highly correlated and hence are not necessary.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*s_ScfgZ_4gB-8kcqJFa7OA.png)
*Heatmap of Correlation of Subset of Features*

After running the random search and choosing the features, the final random
forest model achieved an RMSE of 3.38 which represents a percentage error of
19.0%. This is a 66% reduction in the error from the naive baseline, and a 30%
reduction in error from the first linear model. This performance illustrates a
critical point in machine learning:

> The returns from feature engineering are much greater than those from model
> optimization. Therefore, it’s crucial to make sure you have a good set of
features before you start worrying about having the best hyperparameters.

Although I ran 50 iterations of random search, the hyperparameter values have
probably not been fully optimized. My next recommendation is:

* **Potential Improvement 4: run model tuning for more iterations on more data.**

The returns from this will probably be less than from feature engineering, but
it’s possible there are still performance gains to be found. If you are feeling
up to the task, you can also try out automated model tuning using a tool such as
Hyperopt (I’ve written a guide which can be found
[here](https://medium.com/p/dfda59b72f8a?source=user_profile---------13------------------).)

*****

#### Interpret Model and Make Predictions

While the random forest is more complex than the linear regression, it’s not a
complete black box. A [random forest is made up of an
ensemble](https://medium.com/p/77bf308a9b76?source=user_profile---------3------------------)
of decision trees which by themselves are very intuitive flow-chart-like models.
We can even [inspect individual trees in the
forest](https://medium.com/p/38ad2d75f21c?source=user_profile---------7------------------)
to get a sense of how they make decisions. Another method for peering into the
black box of the random forest is by examining the feature importances. The
technical details aren’t that important at the moment, but we can use the
relative values to determine which features are considered relevant to the
model.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*xHzyDFupyRjOw_rXKl2bsg.png)
*Feature Importances from training on all features*

The most important feature by far is the Euclidean distance of the taxi ride,
followed by the `pickup_Elapsed` , one of the time variables. Given that we made
both of these features, we should be confident that our feature engineering went
to good use! We could also feature importances for feature engineering or
selection since we do not need to keep all of the variables.

Finally, we can take a look at the model predictions both on the validation data
and on the test data. Because we have the validation answers, we can compute the
error of the predictions, and we can examine the testing predictions for extreme
values (there were several in the linear regression). Below is a plot of the
validation predictions for the final model.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*aBqGZxThsoYIh4m15S04Cw.png)
*Random Forest validation predictions and true values*

Model interpretation is still a relatively new field, but there are some
[promising methods](https://github.com/marcotcr/lime) for examining a model.
While the primary goal of machine learning is making accurate predictions on new
data, it’s also equally important to know *why* the model is accurate and if it
can teach us anything about the problem.

*****

#### Next Steps

Although we tried a number of different techniques and implemented a complete
solution, there are still steps to take that can improve the model. My next
approach would be to try an even more complex model, such as a deep neural
network or a gradient boosting machine. I haven’t implemented these in the
notebook, but I am working on them. I’ll let you try first (I can’t give away
all the answers!).

* **Potential Improvement 5: try more complex models such as the** [gradient
boosting
machine](https://medium.com/mlreview/gradient-boosting-from-scratch-1e317ae4587d)

With a machine learning project, there are always more approaches to try, and
you can even come up with your own method if you are not satisfied with the
existing options! Machine learning is a largely empirical field with no
standardized rules, and the only way to know if something works is to test it.

At this point, I’ll leave you to your own devices for improving the model. I’ve
given you five different recommendations that should allow you to beat the best
cross validation score I achieved in the notebook.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*NTYvogPl5U934116t8A1wQ.png)
*Final Model Results*

This is certainly a friendly challenge, so don’t get frustrated, and don’t
hesitate to reach out if you need help. All of these recommendations are
*potential *improvements because I can’t guarantee that they’ll improve the
score. Nonetheless, I do know it’s possible to build a better model, and I’ll
work on my end as well to try and build it!

If you need some more inspiration, here’s two other complete machine learning
projects I’ve done to give you some ideas:

* [A Data Science for Good Machine Learning Project Walk-Through in
Python](https://medium.com/p/1977dd701dbc?source=user_profile---------6------------------)
(two parts)
* [A Complete Machine Learning Walk-Through in
Python](https://medium.com/p/c62152f39420?source=user_profile---------23------------------)
(three parts)

The next steps are up to you!

*****

### Conclusions

In this article and accompanying [Jupyter
Notebook](https://github.com/WillKoehrsen/taxi-fare/blob/master/A Walkthrough
and a Challenge.ipynb), I presented a complete machine learning walk-through on
a realistic dataset. We implemented the solution in Python code, and touched on
many key concepts in machine learning. Machine learning is not a magical art,
but rather a craft that can be [honed through
repetition](http://projects.ict.usc.edu/itw/gel/EricssonDeliberatePracticePR93.PDF).There
is nothing stopping anyone from learning how to solve real-world problems using
machine learning, and the most effective method for becoming adept is to work
through projects.

In the spirit of learn by doing, my challenge to you is to improve upon my best
model in the notebook and I’ve left you with a few recommendations that I
believe will improve performance. There’s no one right answer in data science,
and I look forward to seeing what everyone can come up with! If you take on the
challenge, please leave a link to your notebook in the comments. Hopefully this
article and notebook have given you the start necessary to get out there and
solve this problem or others. And, when you do need help, don’t hesitate to ask
because the data science community is always supportive.

*****

As always, I welcome feedback, discussion, and constructive criticism. I can be
reached on Twitter [@koehrsen_will](http://twitter.com/@koehrsen_will) or by
commenting on this article.
